README.md, before:

![UAVCAN](doc_source/images/html/uavcan_logo.svg) UAVCAN stack in C++
===================

[![Build Status](https://badge.buildkite.com/af844974c06af6406e3b2192d98298b02b30f6ebebb5f8b16c.svg)](https://buildkite.com/uavcan/libuavcan-v1)
[![Forum](https://img.shields.io/discourse/https/forum.uavcan.org/users.svg)](https://forum.uavcan.org)
[![Sonarqube Badge](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=UAVCAN_libuavcan&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=UAVCAN_libuavcan)
[![Sonarqube Coverage](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=UAVCAN_libuavcan&metric=coverage)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=UAVCAN_libuavcan)
[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-passing-green.svg)](https://uavcan.org/libuavcan/)

> **WARNING** libuavcan v1 is not yet complete. This is a work-in-progress.

Portable reference implementation of the [UAVCAN protocol stack](https://new.uavcan.org) in C++ for embedded systems, Linux, and POSIX-compliant RTOSs.

UAVCAN is a lightweight protocol designed for reliable communication in aerospace and robotic applications over robust vehicular networks.

Commit message:

massive rename to libcyphal (#321)
* massive rename to libcyphal
* starting cleanup of verify.py and migration to github actions

README.md, after:

![OpenCyphal](doc_source/images/html/cyphal_logo.svg) Cyphal stack in C++
===================

[![Forum](https://img.shields.io/discourse/https/forum.opencyphal.org/users.svg)](https://forum.opencyphal.org)
[![Sonarqube Badge](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=OpenCyphal_libcyphal&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=OpenCyphal_libcyphal)
[![Sonarqube Coverage](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=OpenCyphal_libcyphal&metric=coverage)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=OpenCyphal_libcyphal)
[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-passing-green.svg)](https://opencyphal.org/libcyphal/)

> **WARNING** libcyphal v1 is not yet complete. This is a work-in-progress.

Portable reference implementation of the [OpenCyphal protocol stack](https://opencyphal.org) in C++ for embedded systems, Linux, and POSIX-compliant RTOSs.

Cyphal is a lightweight protocol designed for reliable communication in aerospace and robotic applications over robust vehicular networks.
